10 WEEK PLANNER
How to Start a
Successful Blog
Table of Contents
Introduction
WEEK 1
Identify Your Target Persona
WEEK 2
Start Building a Bank of Evergreen Content
WEEK 3
Choose the Right Content Management
System for Your Blog
WEEK 4
Design Your Blog
WEEK 5
Focus on Your Content Strategy
WEEK 6
Set Up Subscriber Pathways
WEEK 7
Plan for Logistics
WEEK 8
Decide on an Internal Editorial Stragety
WEEK 9
How to Attract and Scale Traffic: SEO and
Promotional Guidelines for Blogging
WEEK 10
Write Your First Posts
Determining the Success of Your Launch:
Metrics to Analyze
Congrats! Now, Some Things to Avoid
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
How to Start a Successful Blog 4 5
Introduction
It’s 2018, and your business either doesn’t have a blog, or it’s
time to upgrade and assess how your blog can really help
function as a tool for business growth. If you’ve already decided
it’s time to launch a blog for your business, you’ve probably
bought into the “why.” Here’s a reminder:
• B2B marketers who use blogs receive 67% more leads than
those who do not.
• Marketers who have prioritized blogging are 13x more
likely to enjoy positive ROI.
• Blogging is cost-effective in that the only thing you really
need to spend is time.
• Companies who blog receive 97% more links directing to
their website.
• Blogs have been rated as the fifth most trusted source for
accurate online information.
Convinced yet? Blogging is a crucial part of inbound marketing
because it allows you to quickly disseminate helpful information
to your followers and new site visitors. This, in turn, helps build
credibility, SEO juice, and helps you become more of a thought
leader in your industry.
Not only that, blogging has an exponential long-term impact.
The longer and more often you blog, the more traffic you’ll
generate over time.
Month 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
2400
0
Contacts generated from blog posts
4800
Contacts generated from previous month’s posts
Contacts generated from this month’s posts
Not only that, blogging has an exponential long-term impact.
The longer and more often you blog, the more traffic you’ll
generate over time.
While the only real cost of blogging is time, you may be thinking,
“Sure, but time is a BIG commitment.” And you’re right.
Starting and maintaining a blog isn’t a one-day task. It takes
planning, resources, and the effort to gain adequate ROI.
Luckily, we’ve created a 10-week planner to help you manage
your time, prioritize the essential components of starting a
blog, and plan for a successful blog launch or relaunch. We’ll
take you through all the essential steps to make the most out of
How to Start a Successful Blog 6 7
WEEK 1
Identify Your Target Persona
The essential first step to launch a successful blog is to know
why and for whom you’re writing content. You might be thinking,
“What do you mean who am I writing for? I’m writing for my
potential customers!”
That may be the case, but having the right target persona
for your blog and products requires much more data and
research. It’s not enough to just want to help your customers
by providing content; you also need to know who your potential
customers are and what pain-points and challenges they want
to solve.
To figure this out, start with a buyer persona — a fictional,
generalized representation of your ideal customer. They help
you understand your customers (and prospective customers)
better, and make it easier for you to tailor content to the
specific needs, behaviors, and concerns of different groups.
When it comes to blogging, having a buyer persona to target
content helps you understand what kinds of content you should
be writing to attract your target customers.
What type of information do you need to collect in order to
understand your buyer persona? Start with these free HubSpot
buyer persona templates and this free guide to launching a
content-first business.
Interview customers both
in person or over the phone
to discover what they
like about your product
or service, what their pain
points are, and what kinds
of content they’re looking for.
Interview your sales
team. They know your
customers best, and are a
great source of information
about your buyer persona.
Look through your
contacts database to
uncover trends about how
certain leads or customers
find and consume your
content.
Survey your contacts
database and ask them key
questions about their role,
department, challenges,
experience, etc.
In order to discover your buyer persona you need information
on current customers and prospects. Here are some practical
methods to get started:
Once you know who your target audience is, it’s time to start
generating a list of content ideas to post on your blog.
Research outside forums
related to your products
and services.
Capture important
persona information on
your contacts and lead
forms on your website.
(e.g., if all your personas
vary based on company
size, ask each lead for
information about company
size on your forms. You
could also gather information
on what forms of
social media your leads use
by asking a question about
social media accounts)
from your brand, which
also helps keep people on
your website. The whole
point of blogging is to
disseminate information, so
make sure to use links that
provide additional helpful
content to your readers.
How to Start a Successful Blog 8
Look at your buyer
persona’s list of
pain points.
Come up with one
topic or keyword, then
brainstorm a list of
different angled pieces
around that same topic.
Do keyword research
to find out what kinds
of keywords people are
searching around your
main topics.
Look at other content that
you’ve created and repurpose
it into blog posts.
Go negative vs. positive. If
you already have content
on the best practices for a
topic in your industry, do
another post on the “do’s
and don’ts” or “how to do X
that doesn’t suck
In order to discover your buyer persona you need information
on current customers and prospects. Here are some practical
methods to get started:
Schedule a team brainstorm
to bounce ideas
off of each other — at
HubSpot we often find
that one person’s idea
generates a whole batch
of new ideas from
other teammates.
Try out HubSpot’s blog
topic generator.
Research what your
competitors are writing
about and think of newer
thought-provoking angles
to explore.
WEEK 2
Start Building a Bank of Evergreen Content
Ideas
You know who you’re writing for. Now the question is: How
do you build and sustain a blog with content for that target
audience? Where’s the best place to start? The answer: by
building a list of evergreen content.
Evergreen content is any content that stays relevant no matter
what week, month, season, or year it is. It’s timeless, high-value,
canonical pieces of content that will remain interesting to your
audience no matter when they interact with it.
Unlike timely or newsworthy pieces, which are also valuable
content for you to consider on your blog, your evergreen
content is where you should start your content brainstorming.
It’s also what will help you rank for keywords and build
authority with search engines over time.
Now that you’ve done research on your buyer persona, it
should be a lot easier to think about what evergreen content
you should be writing — both at launch and as time goes on.
9
Once you have a good topic list going, start writing or assigning
those posts to your team. Bookmark your brainstorm list for later,
and continue to build on it into the future.
You’ll be surprised how many more ideas you think of once you
start writing!
How to Start a Successful Blog 10 11
WEEK 3:
Choose the Right CMS for Your Blog
In order to successfully launch and maintain a blog, you’ll need
an effective content management system (CMS) — a digital
system that enables you to host digital content.
While identifying your target persona and generating content
ideas is the strategic side of launching a blog, these next few
weeks are devoted to the equally important technical side.
Ease of use
If you don’t have a lot of technical support at your company,
choosing a CMS that’s easy to use is crucial. Most content
management systems come with templates you can use or
support to help you design it, so make sure you choose one
that will work for the skills on your team.
Key metrics you can track
Does the CMS allow you to track metrics like conversion
rates, page views, and where your traffic is coming from?
Analyzing the success of your blog will be incredibly important
post-launch, so make sure your CMS allows you to track
the success of your efforts.
Responsiveness
60 percent of all searches on Google come from mobile,
which means it’s absolutely essential for your blog to be
optimized for for any device that your user opens content on.
A CMS that automatically makes your content resp onsive
to device type is a must for marketers starting a blog in 2018.
Looking for a great content
management system that’s easy to use,
gives you access to the metrics you
need, and makes marketing automation easy?
Try HubSpot — it’s not just a content management
system, it’s a content optimization system.
So, what should you look for in a CMS?
How to Start a Successful Blog 12 13
WEEK 4
Design Your Blog
Once you’ve chosen a CMS, it’s time to make your blog come to
life. You’ll want to not only make your blog look awesome, but
also optimize it for lead generation and turning visitors into
prospects and, ultimately, customers. So, how do you design
a great blog that will be easy to access and delight visitors?
It starts with the right elements and understanding user
interface and user experience. If you or someone at your
company knows how to custom create your blog, make sure
you check off our list of essential design elements.
Most content management systems will offer you free
templates that you can modify and use if your team has less
design experience. And, if you’re interested in the theory
behind designing a great blog, you can enhance your skill set
by learning user experience design with General Assembly.
Need a little inspiration for designing your blog? Check out
these awesome examples.
Main blog page
The main page should tell
your visitors about the blog
and include links to the
most recent posts. Be sure
to include a search feature
and/or an archive of your
past posts so visitors
can access both new and
old content.
Color scheme
To make your blog’s design
feels coherent, choose a
color scheme and stick
with it across all your
pages. Trying using your
brand colors as a base
and adding a few accent
colors to tie the whole
design together.
Branding
Make sure your blog’s
design looks consistent
with the rest of your
site branding. While it’s
important to distinguish
your blog’s look from other
pages on your site, your
visitors should still feel
as though they are on a
related page.
Blog post templates
Each blog post should have
the same general layout so
readers have a consistent
experience across each
page. A simple way to
ensure this is by designing
a template to use for each
new blog post!
Calls-to-Action (CTAs)
A blog is a tool to convert
buyers at the top of the
funnel, so linking to pieces
of content that will nurture
your visitors down the
funnel is important.
Here are 8 types
of CTAs to
consider building
into each blog post.
You can also try
a slide-in CTA,
another strategy to
convert visitors.
Make sure our best practices for good blog design are checked
off your list this week:
How to Start a Successful Blog 14 15
WEEK 5
Focus On Your Content Strategy
For the past few weeks, you’ve focused your energy on the
logistics of setting up your blog — from getting started on
your CMS to designing and optimizing blog pages. There’s still
more technical room to grow, but now let’s focus on your
content strategy.
Before launching your blog, it’s essential to think about an
internal content strategy — both short-term and long-term.
Your team needs to answer a few questions about how much
time and bandwidth you’re willing to devote to blogging.
Want to learn more about content strategy?
Check out General Assembly’s Digital Marketing course,
which will teach you how to develop your
own successful content strategy and beyond.
How often should you blog?
How often and when to post will largely depend on what
your company does, how big your company is, and how
much of an audience you’re looking to attract.
That being said, the more you blog, the more traffic you’ll
attract over time. And more traffic means more leads and
more customers.
As a team, it’s your job to decide how much time you’re
willing to invest in your blog. But as a general rule of thumb,
once a day or a few times a week is a good place to start.
What types of content are you going to write and post?
When it comes to content matter and post style, blogs are
extremely versatile. You can post infographics, how-to posts,
list posts, newsjacking posts, slideshares, editorials, etc.
Decide what types of formats you want to try and how many
resources you can put behind each.
Over time, analyze which format performs best to tailor your
content strategy toward your audience. The more formats
you try out from the beginning, the better your data will be
over time.
What are your goals for launch and post-launch?
How much website traffic do you want to generate within
the first weeks of launch versus six months out from launch?
How will you track those metrics, and how will you promote
your blog in order to hit your goals?
While some of these questions will depend on your current
follower base, your CMS, and your promotional strategy, it’s
good to have an internal discussion about these goals well
before launch so your team can align on their expectations.
Setting expectations internally while planning your content
strategy is key. Does planning ahead mean your content
strategy won’t change over time? Not at all. But laying this
groundwork will make you more flexible down the road and
allow you to be more focused in the meantime.
How to Start a Successful Blog 16
WEEK 6
Set Up Subscriber Pathways
Now that your team has set content strategy goals, let’s think
about how you’re actually going to meet those goals. How are
you planning to promote your blog, and how will your content
spread organically?
An effective way to encourage your content’s reach is to
encourage subscriptions. Ideally, this will lead the people
who regularly interact with your content to see it, read it,
and share it with people they know. Subscribers also help
you communicate regularly with the same people, letting you
nurture them to become leads and customers down the road.
Subscriber emails
Set up a workflow that
automatically sends
subscribers emails with
your latest posts. Make
an email template with
links to your posts that
curates your scheduled
content and send it on to
your subscribers. Over
time, make sure you’re
optimizing the subscriber
emails for clickthrough rate
and conversions. Check
out the anatomy of a blog
subscriber email here.
Subscriber forms
How will your site visitors
sign up for a blog subscription?
Set up forms on your
main blog page and CTAs
on your blog posts to
enable people to sign up.
Subscribers must opt-in to
be emailed, so be sure
your CTAs and form copy
are compelling.
Calendar
Schedule your subscriber
emails in advance of
sending to allow time for
corrections! HubSpot’s
blog tool can help with that.
Frequency
How often will your
subscribers get emailed?
Daily? Weekly? Each time
a new post is published?
It’s important to be clear
to your subscribers about
how often they’ll be
emailed. Pro tip: The more
you email people, the more
likely they are to eventually
opt-out. Keep the
frequency to a minimum!
We recommend weekly or
monthly depending on how
often you post.
Unsubscribe pages
You’re required to give
anybody you email the
option to unsubscribe from
your mailing list. Have fun
with it! Check out HubSpot’s
unsubscribe page as an
example and think of ways
to delight your audience
and perhaps even encourage
them to continue receiving
your emails.
Before launching your blog, make sure you set up the
following to start getting blog subscriptions right away.
17
How to Start a Successful Blog 18
WEEK 7
Plan for Logistics
Subscriber pathways are only the start of blog logistics you
need to plan for. How else will you convert visitors into
leads from your blog posts or get subscribers to interact with
you elsewhere?
In Week 7, it’s time to think through some of the other logistics
of your blog — from encouraging social sharing to planning
your launch day.
Social sharing buttons
Attract new visitors and encourage people to share your
content by adding social sharing icons to your blog posts.
CTAs
Think about where you want visitors to go once they read
your blog posts. You probably don’t want them to leave your
site, so add CTAs and hyperlinks to other content, offers, and
site pages. Over time, test to see what works best for your
audience. Maybe it’s specific content offers, maybe it’s visual
CTAs, or maybe it’s pop ups! Here’s a CTA best practices guide
to get you started.
How to handle comments
Most content management systems enable blog commenters
on posts. Comments are a good feature because it
encourages user generated content and engagements
with your content. Make sure you plan for how to handle
comments. Will comments be allowed all the time or just
for a short period? Who will be responsible for responding
to those comments or questions? Decide on your policy
beforehand so your team knows how to handle comments
from launch day onward.
Adding dates to blog posts
Don’t forget to add publishing dates to all of your blog posts!
It’s important for visitors to know how recent and relevant
your content is for credibility. It also allows you to track
metrics over time and update posts when you need to.
19
Here are some logistical elements of blogging to consider
before launching.
How to Start a Successful Blog 20
WEEK 8
Decide on an Internal Editorial Strategy
When it comes to blog credibility and authority, there are two
main facets to keep in mind: search engine authority and the
reputation of your blog from your visitors. Building authority
with search engines is all about SEO and link building, but we’ll
dive deeper into this next week. The reputation of your blog is
all about your editorial strategy.
Think about it: If you read an article or blog post that doesn’t
cite sources, doesn’t include relevant facts and statistics, and
is full of typos, you’re not very likely to find it valuable or share
it with others. You might even be more likely to criticize the
author of that content.
Providing valuable content isn’t just about the writing, it’s also
about the editing. Let’s plan for your editorial strategy: what
are your standards and guidelines, and how will you keep your
team accountable for those standards?
Now that you’ve focused on how you’ll maintain the reputation
of your blog through the editing process, it’s time to move
onto building authority and a reputation for your blog through
search engine optimization and promotional strategies.
21
Who writes what?
The first step is planning who will write the blog content.
Make sure you have enough resources and time to keep
up with the content strategy you’ve set up. If you hope to
publish three blog posts a day but only have one blog post
author, you probably won’t be able to keep up with that
schedule for long. Take the time to plan out your resources,
and put your best content writers on the job.
How is your internal editing process handled?
It doesn’t matter how good your writers are, every piece of
writing needs to be edited and reviewed by an editor. Identify
a blog editor (even if it’s one of many tasks they handle) to
make sure no piece of writing gets published without being
fact-checked and edited for typos.
What are your editorial standards?
Every team that writes content needs an editorial standard
or style to look to for guidelines. Whether it’s grammatical
principles, citation guidelines, or capitalizations, make sure
you have guidelines for you team in place. Most English
online writing uses the Associated Press Stylebook (which
we use at HubSpot, too!).
Below are 3 questions to ask yourself in order to help
determine your editorial strategy and voice.
How to Start a Successful Blog 22 23
WEEK 9
How to Attract and Scale Traffic: SEO and
Promotional Guidelines
In the long term, blogging can help increase your website
traffic exponentially, but it will take some hard work on your
end. How will you disseminate and promote your posts and
make sure your content is ranking high on search engine
results pages? It takes a little search engine optimization
(SEO) and promotional effort to achieve this.
How to get started with SEO in the short term
How to do keyword research
SEO starts with ranking for keywords that your target audience
is searching for. The best way to rank for keywords is by
designing your blog posts based on the keywords you’re trying
to rank for. Start with keyword research, and use those
keywords to brainstorm and tailor your posts.
How to decide what to rank for
While researching, you’ll probably notice that some keywords
have very high search volume with high competition. This
makes them very difficult for any new publication to rank for
right off the bat. Look for long-tailed, niche keywords with
low competition to start. You may not generate high search
volume right away, but the more niche your keywords are,
the better qualified your visitors will be.
Optimize your blog posts for SEO
Once you’ve chosen keywords, it’s time to optimize each
blog post for SEO. Make sure you’re optimizing your meta
description, page title, keywords, URLs, etc. for the
keywords you’re trying to rank for. Want to learn more about
SEO? Check out this video and OnPage SEO template.
Strategies for promoting your blog
Social media
Once your blog launches, promote the launch and blog
posts on your social media accounts. Leverage your existing
audience to generate traffic to your new blog. Don’t forget to
use images, videos, and compelling copy in your posts!
Paid campaigns
Want to reach more people not already interacting with your
brand? Use paid campaigns on social media platforms like
Linkedin, Twitter, Facebook, and Instagram to promote your
new blog.
Press release
The launch of your blog is a great time to write a press
release and announce the launch to the public. The more
backlinks you get to your blog on launch day, the better for
your SEO juice and the more traffic you’ll bring in.
How to Start a Successful Blog 24
WEEK 10
Write Your First Posts
With just a week before launch, it’s finally time to start writing
your first posts and building a bank of content to publish during
the first few weeks your blog is live. If you focus your energy on
writing in advance, you’ll give yourself more time to get ahead
of schedule and deal with other items that may come up when
launch day arrives.
Remember back in Week 2 when you generated a list of
evergreen content ideas? Start with that list, and choose a
few of your top ideas to start writing. You can always continue
thinking of new ideas or timely posts to write about.
Make it skimmable
Use images, bullets, lists,
and short paragraphs to
make your blog posts easy
to read and easy to skim.
Your goal is to encourage
your audience to keep
reading, not scare them
away with large chunks
of text.
Plan a promotional
strategy for your first post
Once you’ve written
your posts, how are you
planning to promote your
blog launch? Go back to
last week’s tips on SEO
and social promotion,
and create a promotional
checklist for launch day.
Consider writing an
announcement blog post
to tell your visitors about
your blog and why they
should follow it. Plan out
your promotional strategy
across social
channels, email, and
paid promotions.
25
Images
Did you know that colored
images make readers
80% more willing to read
a piece of content? Use
images, graphics, or even
videos to make your blog
posts more appealing to
readers. Start with stock
photos, or use Canva to
make custom graphics.
Link to other resources
Don’t forget to use
hyperlinks in your post
to connect readers to
other resources. This is
important for two reasons;
First, people want to know
where information and
facts are coming from, so
due diligence and proper
citations are critical.
Second, you can use your
blog posts to link to other
resources and content
from your brand, which
also helps keep people on
your website. The goal of
blogging is to disseminate
information, so make sure
to use links that provide
additional helpful content
to your readers.
Once you’ve chosen a few initial topics, keep these blog
writing tips in mind:
How to Start a Successful Blog 26 27
Determining the Success of Your Launch:
Metrics to Analyze
Your first blog posts have been written, everything has been
planned out, and you’ve spent that last 10 weeks setting your
blog up for success. Now, it’s time to determine how you’ll
measure that success.
When it comes to blogging, it’s important to set up and analyze
key metrics over time. First, identify your team’s goals for your
blog. What are you trying to accomplish? Likely, the goals will
be gaining subscribers, leads, and then customers by bringing
blog visitors through the buyer’s journey to your product or
service. Once you’ve answered those questions, set realistic
goals based on the following metrics:
Page views
The main way to measure how much traffic your blog
receives is tracking the number of page views each post
generates. In other words, how many visitors are coming
to and reading your posts?
Click-through rate (CTR)
One key component of building SEO juice is the click-through
rate that each of your posts see. Are people coming to your
blog, then clicking on hyperlinks within the post? The more
visitors click through and stay on your site, the better it is for
the overall authority of your blog.
Sources of traffic
One important measurement to consider is where you traffic
is coming from. Are your promotional efforts paying off?
What are the big levers that drive most of your traffic to your
blog? Whether it’s your social promotion, emails, or paid
campaigns, make sure you’re tracking which channels drive
the most traffic. This information will help you tailor your
content strategy over time.
Leads and customers gained from your blog over time
It’s up to you to decide how you track this number. Some
companies track leads from their blog on a monthly basis,
while others do so each quarter.
So, how do you track this data? Most content management systems
enable you to track these metrics easily, so make sure you know how
to analyze them within your CMS before launch.
Now that you know what and how to track the right metrics, it’s time
to set post-launch goals for your team, both short- and long-term.
Hold a planning meeting with your team to set goals for page views
and click-through rates within the first month, six months, and year
after launch. If you set realistic goals and hold your team accountable
accordingly, you’ll set yourself up for success at the outset of your
blogging adventure.
Keep in mind
Don’t stress too much if you don’t see high metrics
right off the bat. Blogging helps provide exponential
growth — the longer you blog, the more authority
you will build over time. No blog goes viral overnight.
Start small, and set realistic goals for the future.
If you don’t hit your goals immediately, revisit
them and look at your metrics. Are your
promotional efforts working? If not, run as many
tests and experiments as you can until they do.
How to Start a Successful Blog 28 29
Congrats! Now, Some Things to Avoid
Congratulations! You’ve reached the end of your 10-week guide
and have (hopefully!) successfully launched your blog. We’d
love to say your work here is done, but, blogging is a long-term
effort. Luckily, it’s one that pays off.
Now that you’ve launched your blog, keep this checklist
of dos and don’ts in mind:
DO
Test your content
strategy over time.
Find out what works for
your audience and what
doesn’t, then tailor your
content accordingly.
Keep blogging even if
you don’t see immediate
high-traffic volume!
Blogging is beneficial for
your business, but only if
you keep at it!
Continue to research
tips and ideas for better
blogging. The HubSpot
Marketing Blog has tons of
posts that can help you out.
DON’T
Keep using a CMS that
doesn’t work for you.
If your CMS is hard to use
or doesn’t easily track data
on your blog, it’s not doing
its job. Luckily, HubSpot
can recommend a great
CMS for you to try!
Forget to do your keyword
research, or optimize every
blog post for SEO.
Rely on organic traffic
alone. Don’t forget to
promote your blog posts
and drive traffic to your
posts as often as possible!
Try to rank for highly
competitive keywords
right off the bat. SEO is a
long-term game. Trying to
rank for highly competitive,
high-volume keywords
won’t work for a brand-new
blog. Keep looking for
niche, long-tail keywords
that will build up your SEO
juice in the short term.
NOTES
Want to learn more about
content strategy?
Check out General
Assembly’s Digital Marketing
course, which will teach you
how to develop your own
successful content strategy
and beyond.
Looking for a great content
management system that’s
easy to use, gives you
access to the metrics you
need, and makes marketing
automation easy?
Try HubSpot — it’s not just
a content management
system, it’s a content
optimization system.
no white ll
